# The Idea of Federation

A federation is an association of multiple entities, following a specific,
defined protocol for their interactions. That leaves two fairly big questions to
be answered.

## What entities?

A common answer, particularly among those deeply influenced by propertarian
thinking, is that the federation should be of individuals. And to be sure,
ultimately all society consists of individuals. And even if we assume that
decision-making by the individual can be subdivided, that structure is not
something we have meaningful control over. But as a practical matter, a
federation of seven *billion* entities does not seem like an achievable goal.
Effective information sharing involving humans appears to hit [serious
limits](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar%27s_number) rather earlier than
that.

The first time the notion of federation was laid out in roughly this form, it
was in the context of France. It was described then as “a federation of free
communes”, referencing the name of France’s municipal authorities. The idea was
that the commune represented an existing organisational unit that could be
adapted to serve as a sort of base unit. In many cases, this would have been
realistic. But then we come to examples such as Paris, where it is absurd to
view the entire huge city as a single unit of governance. Hang on, though …
aren’t we discussing a solution of exactly that problem?

Well, yes. The *point* of a federation is to enable more-or-less common
governance of something that’s too big for a single entity to deal with. And
there’s really nothing that says that an entity forming part of a federation
can’t be a federation itself. A multilevel federation, with entities formed
along some reasonable lines at each level — and if further subdivision is
needed, a new federation at a level below. This creates certain constraints.
Specifically, if this is to work, the federation (the federating protocol) must
make no assumptions about the internal structure of each unit. For this
structure to be fair, it must be built around consensus at each level: No unit
participating can be forced to adhere to a decision it did not agree to. There
can be no central authority in such a system. Instead, the [principle of
subsidiarity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsidiarity) is taken to its logical
conclusion: Final decisions on all matters pertaining to a unit are made *by*
that unit. Clearly-defined procedures — the protocol — are used to coordinate
decisions that must be made jointly by several units.

The federal system is indifferent to what its entities represent, and what sort
of activities they need to coordinate. Federations of this sort have shown up in
a number of different places, including the cooperative movement, the labour
movement and a handful of political revolutions. The interesting thing is that
similar principles underpin the technical operation of the Internet, have been
found in neurological structures, and in general seem to crop up in every
reasonably complex system we study. This seems to me unlikely to be sheer
coincidence.

## What protocol?

Most current political systems are based on the concept of *representation*: A
certain number of people are chosen from the population at large to deliberate
on legislation. Those people are tasked with making decisions on behalf of the
people they represent, and they are quite explicitly *not* bound by any mandate.
Theoretically speaking, random sampling procedures should be optimal for this
purpose, for precisely the same reasons random sampling is useful in surveys.
Nevertheless, there has been considerable resistance against the use of random
sampling for this purpose. Instead, we prefer to use elections: Casting votes
for the people we think are likely to represent us accurately, who then have no
duty whatever towards us. (And so the theory goes. The presence of political
parties as a formal part of the election system usually makes this even
sillier.)

Inside an unitary entity, representation is an alternative to direct
participation by everyone. In a federation, however, representation only makes
sense if the federation as a whole has the ability to dictate terms to its
component entities. Why else would the entity send someone with the power to
make their own decisions?

There is an alternative in a federation: Delegation. Under delegation, the
entities send not representatives with independent authority to make decisions,
but delegates with mandates — specific instructions on the terms they are
allowed to agree to. Such delegates obviously have to be recallable for any
reason, and without delay. Unlike with representatives, there’s also no need for
a standing committee — what’s today often called parliament or congress.
Delegates are appointed in reference to a specific issue or specific field,
rather than being appointed for a specific period. The objective of the
delegates is not to reach a decision which then is binding for all entities, but
rather to find a solution that is acceptable to all the relevant entities.
Should no such solution exist, the matter needs to be reconsidered — either
someone must change their position, or the scope of the solution altered.
